[blog] Announcing `jupyterhub-groups-exporter`: monitor usage based on JupyterHub group membership with Prometheus and Grafana (#419)
2i2c-org/2i2c-brochure: content/blog/2025/jupyterhub-groups-exporter/index.md

---

> title: "Group-level resource monitoring with JupyterHub, Prometheus and Grafana"

Reviewer: Let's mention `jupyterhub-groups-exporter` in the title.

```suggestion
title: "Announcing `jupyterhub-groups-exporter`: Generate reports based on JupyterHub group membership with Prometheus and Grafana"
```

subtitle: ""
authors: ["Jenny Wong"]
tags: ["jupyterhub", "prometheus", "grafana", "kubernetes"]
categories: ["Service"]
date: "2025-06-08"
featured: false
draft: false
---

Managing user groups in JupyterHub can be a challenging task, especially in environments with dynamic user bases and complex group structures. This post describes how we can leverage the latest group management features in JupyterHub, along with Prometheus and Grafana, to monitor group-level resource usage effectively.

![Grafana User Group Diagnostics Dashboard showing a memory usage over time with each line aggregating usage over a different user group.](./featured.png)

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: This nicely satisfies the 'what is the problem?' part of the blog post structure.

Hub admins have a strong impetus to monitor usage and costs by user groups
because it allows them to advocate for better funding and cost recovery models based on data-driven insights. Group-level resource monitoring can help them to answer questions like:

- How many people participated in our workshop group?
- How much GPU compute is our power user group using?
- Is our resource usage cost-effective for X group persona or Y group persona?

> 

Reviewer: Add a section here on 'what is the cost of not solving it?'

Here are a couple of ideas:

1. You have to continue to have separate hubs for separate groups if you want to have clearer understanding of usage patterns
2. You can see per-user information (through prometheus and grafana), and will have to write your own custom code to generate group based reports
3. Multiple disparate groups of users can't use the hub due to accounting and reporting reasons, negating the positive changes brought about by 2i2c's other contributions to group based JupyterHub usage. Mention https://github.com/jupyterhub/oauthenticator/pull/735, https://github.com/jupyterhub/oauthenticator/pull/498 and our ability to restrict profile options based on user groups (this isn't upstream yet)

> ## JupyterHub and user groups

Reviewer: This is a great part of "3. What has changed that makes it solveable?". The narrative I think is the following things have changed (over the last few years):

1. JupyterHub has better groups support, which you can edit in the admin interface manually (what's already in the first paragraph)
2. JupyterHub can also load group membership from external authentication sources (such as GitHub, etc) (the existing second paragraph)

The "problem" as such is that there was no easy way to do reporting on this. Prometheus is the most common way to collect metrics for reporting, and while it has information about *users*, it doesn't have information about groups. JupyterHub exports prometheus metrics itself, but doesn't emit any per user or per group metrics currently.

Can we turn these into a narrative that leads into the next section which can be "4. What did we do to solve it?"

Users can access JupyterHub using a variety of authentication methods. Authentication providers like GitHub have built-in user management features that allow admins to create and manage user groups. These groups can configured in JupyterHub to authorize access to the hub, as well as control access to certain hardware profiles.

We can also leverage [authenticator-managed group membership](https://jupyterhub.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/authenticators.html#authenticator-managed-group-membership) to automatically pass user group memberships from the authentication layer to JupyterHub itself. This allows us to capitalize on JupyterHub's REST API to retrieve user group memberships from other services, such as exporting them as Prometheus metrics.

> ## Exporting user group memberships to Prometheus

Reviewer: This is a great "4. What did we do to solve it?". What we have done is write this exporter that adds metrics to prometheus! It can be deployed to *any* jupyterhub instance, not just kubernetes. We deploy it on kubernetes (link to our infrastructure repo) with z2jh. The rest of the content you have here is excellent and should be incorporated too.

The [`jupyterhub-groups-exporter`](https://github.com/2i2c-org/jupyterhub-groups-exporter) project provides a service that integrates with JupyterHub to export user group memberships as Prometheus metrics. Exposing user group data as an endpoint for Prometheus to scrape allows us to query and join groups data with a range of usage metrics to gain powerful group-level insights.

> ## Visualizing user group resource usage with Grafana

Reviewer: This is a great start for "5. What does this unlock?". I think we should set this up by:

1. Showing exactly what the prometheus metrics look like (a screenshot or just a list of those metrics is helpful). In particular, show that it has username, escaped username and the group name as *labels*
2. Show this allows us to use promql *grouping* mechanism (can just link out, no need to describe) to group any other arbitrary query that also has username information. Provide one sample query here + a screenshot
3. Describe that you don't have to know all this yourself, and can just use the jupyterhub grafana dashboards! but link to the PR and note it's not merged yet.

We made an upstream contribution to the [jupyterhub/grafana-dashboards](https://github.com/jupyterhub/grafana-dashboards) project to encapsulate the PromQL queries as Jsonnet code and represent them as Grafana Dashboard visualizations (also known as [Grafonnet](https://grafana.github.io/grafonnet/index.html)).

> 

Reviewer: Add a section here inviting people to deploy this themselves, and send us bug reports and contributions.

## Future work

> We have laid the foundation for extensible group-level management with JupyterHub by encoding user group memberships in JupyterHub's database. This makes user group data readily available through the REST API endpoint to be consumed by other services.

Reviewer: In this case, let's scope ourselves to prometheus alone rather than the general JupyterHub work.

Future directions for this work include:

- visualising cloud cost by user group in Grafana

> - streamlining management of hardware profile options by user group

Reviewer: This already exists, but not contributed upstream! This is our `allowed_groups` functionality. Let's remove this from here

- introducing group-level resource quotas.

> What do you think? How would you like to see JupyterHub's group management features evolve? [We welcome your feedback!](https://airtable.com/appM2L2x1uglMU0hy/pagWPJDEKTlLd7uMP/form)

Reviewer: Is anyone monitoring this airtable? What is the process for responding to it? I don't know if this process is documented someplace. I'd prefer we just have an email here, unless this is part of a process for receiving feedback I don't know about.

Author: This is in place but not rolled out yet: https://github.com/2i2c-org/meta/issues/1925

- `username` – the unescaped username of the user
- `username_escape` – the escaped username

Escaped usernames are useful because Kubernetes pods have characterset limits for valid pod label names (this limit does not apply to pod annotations). Storing both types of usernames allows us to join escaped versions with their more human-readable unescaped usernames.

Exposing this metric as an endpoint for Prometheus to scrape allows us to query and join groups data with a range of usage metrics to gain powerful group-level insights. Here is an example PromQL query that retrieves the memory usage by user group:

```promql
sum(
  container_memory_working_set_bytes{name!="", pod=~"jupyter-.*", namespace=~"$hub_name"}
    * on (namespace, pod) group_left(annotation_hub_jupyter_org_username, usergroup)
    group(
        kube_pod_annotations{namespace=~"$hub_name", annotation_hub_jupyter_org_username=~".*", pod=~"jupyter-.*"}
    ) by (pod, namespace, annotation_hub_jupyter_org_username)
    * on (namespace, annotation_hub_jupyter_org_username) group_left(usergroup)
    group(
      label_replace(jupyterhub_user_group_info{namespace=~"$hub_name", username=~".*", usergroup=~"$user_group"},

>         "annotation_hub_jupyter_org_username", "$1", "username", "(.+)")

Reviewer: TIL about `label_replace`.
